---
layout: prog-rules
guide: 1
total_guides: 10
---
# Program Development Using LFE - Programming Rules and Conventions

## 1 Introduction

### 1.1 Abstract

This is a description of programming rules and advise for how to write systems using LFE.

### 1.2 Caveats and Warnings

This document is a preliminary document and is not complete.

This document contains examples of bad code. They are to demonstrate what
*not* to do. Ready carefully lest you misinterpret.

### 1.3 Additional Requirements

The requirements for the use of EBC's "Base System" are not documented here,
but must be followed at a very early design phase if the "Base System" is to
be used. These requirements are documented in 1/10268-AND 10406 Uen "MAP -
Start and Error Recovery".

### 1.4 Purpose

This paper lists some aspects which should be taken into consideration when
specifying and programming software systems using LFE. It does not attempt
to give a complete description of general specification and design activities
which are independent of the use of LFE.

### 1.5 Background and Credits

LFE Programming Rules and Conventions was copied from the
<a href="http://www.erlang.se/doc/programming_rules.shtml">Erlang original</a>
and modified for use with LFE programming best practices. All credit to the following:

* EPK/NP Klas Eriksson
* EUA/SU M Williams
* J Armstrong


### 1.7 Changes in the LFE Version

Obvious changes include the conversion of Erlang code examples to LFE code
examples. However, there exist other more subtle differences. They include
the following:

* Replacing or complementing occuranges of the word "Erlang" with "LFE"
* Adding clarity to some points.
* Restructure a few sentences and paragraphs.
* Adding missing words or removing extraneous ones.
* Tweaking punctuation.
* Adding formatting (e.g., emphasis).

### 1.6 LFE Source Code

Source code for some of the examples (both good and bad) can be found in the
``prog-rules/src``
<a href="https://github.com/lfe/lfe.github.io/tree/master/prog-rules/src">directory</a>
of the
<a href="https://github.com/lfe/lfe.github.io">github repo for
lfe.github.io</a>.
