---
layout: prog-rules
guide: 10
total_guides: 10
---
# LFE Programming Rules and Conventions

## 10 Required Documents

This section describes some of the system level documents which are
necessary for designing and maintaining system programmed using LFE.

From the perspective of a book, each set of documents would be a section or
a "Part", e.g., "Part I" or "Part II". Each Part would then have one or more
"Chapters".

The Parts we propose here are as follows:

* Part I: Module Descriptions
* Part II: Message Descriptions
* Part III: Processes
* Part IV: Error Messages

### 10.1 Module Descriptions

In a project book, the section dedicated to modules would have one chapter
per module. Each chapter should start with a description of the module, and
the list all exported functions as follows:

* the meaning and data structures of the arguments to the functions
* the meaning and data structure of the return value.
* the purpose of the function
* the possible causes of failure and exit signals which may be generated by
  explicit calls to exit/1.

### 10.2 Message Descriptions

The second section should have one or more chapters dedicated to detailing
the format of all inter-process messages (except those defined inside one
module).

### 10.3 Process

The third section should have a description of all registered servers in the
system, along with their interface and purpose.

Also procide a description of the dynamic processes and their interfaces.

### 10.4 Error Messages

The fourth section should have a description of all the system's error
messages.

