---
layout: prog-rules
guide: 4
total_guides: 10
---
# LFE Programming Rules and Conventions

## 4 Error Handling

### 4.1 Separate error handling and normal case code

Don't clutter code for the "normal case" with code designed to handle
exceptions. As far as possible you should only program the normal case. If
the code for the normal case fails, your process should report the error and
crash as soon as possible. Don't try to fix up the error and continue. The
error should be handled in a different process.

(See <a href="http://lfe.github.io/prog-rules/5.html">Chapter 5</a>:
"5 Processes, Servers and Messages", section 5.5: "Each process should only
have one 'role'".)

Clean separation of error recovery code and normal case code should greatly
simplify the overall system design.

The error logs which are generated when a software or hardware error is
detected will be used at a later stage to diagnose and correct the error. A
permanent record of any information that will be helpful in this process
should be kept.

### 4.2 Identify the error kernel

One of the basic elements of system design is identifying which part of the
system has to be correct and which part of the system does not have to be
correct.

In conventional operating system design the kernel of the system is assumed
to be, and must be, correct, whereas all user application programs do not
necessarily have to be correct. If a user application program fails this
will only concern the application where the failure occurred but should not
affect the integrity of the system as a whole.

The first part of the system design must be to identify that part of the
system which must be correct; we call this the error kernel. Often the error
kernel has some kind of real-time memory resident data base which stores the
state of the hardware.
