---
layout: prog-rules
guide: 6
total_guides: 10
---
# LFE Programming Rules and Conventions

## 6 Various LFE Specific Conventions

### 6.1 Use records as the principle data structure

Use records as the principle data structure. A record is a tagged tuple and
was introduced in Erlang version 4.3 and thereafter (see EPK/NP 95:034). It
is similar to struct in C or record in Pascal.

If the record is to be used in several modules, its definition should be
placed in a header file (with suffix ``.lfe``) that is included from the
modules. If the record is only used from within one module, the definition
of the record should be in the beginning of the file the module is defined
in.

The record features of LFE can be used to ensure cross module consistency
of data structures and should therefore be used by interface functions when
passing data structures between modules.

### 6.2 Use selectors and constructors

Use the record macros provided by LFE for managing instances of records.
Don't use matching that explicitly assumes that the record is a tuple.

Example:

```cl
(defun demo ()
  (let* ((joe (make-person name '"Joe" age 29))
         (name-2 (person-name joe)))
    ...
    ))
```

Don't program like this:

```cl
(defun demo ()
  (let* ((joe (make-person name '"Joe" age 29))
         ((tuple 'person name age) joe))
    ...
    ))
```

### 6.3 Use tagged return values

Use tagged return values.

Don't program like this:

```cl
(defun keysearch
  ((key (cons (tuple key value) tail))
    value)
  ((key (cons (tuple wrong-key wrong-value) tail))
    (keysearch key '()))
  ((key '())
    'false))
```

Then ``(tuple key, value)`` cannot contain the false value.

This is the correct solution:

```cl
(defun keysearch
  ((key (cons (tuple key value) tail))
    (tuple 'value value))
  ((key (cons (tuple wrong-key wrong-value) tail))
    (keysearch key '()))
  ((key '())
    'false))
```

### 6.4 Use catch and throw with extreme care

Do not use catch and throw unless you know exactly what you are doing! Use
catch and throw as little as possible.

Catch and throw can be useful when the program handles complicated and
unreliable input (from the outside world, not from your own reliable
program) that may cause errors in many places deeply within the code. One
example is a compiler.

### 6.5 Use the process dictionary with extreme care

Do not use ``get`` and ``put`` etc. unless you know exactly what you are
doing! Use ``get`` and ``put`` etc., as little as possible.

A function that uses the process dictionary can be rewritten by introducing
a new argument.

Don't program like this:

```cl
(defun tokenize
  (((cons head tail))
    ...)
  (('())
    (case (get-characters-from-device (get 'device))
      ('eof
        '())
      ((tuple 'value chars)
        (tokenize chars)))))
```

The correct solution:

```cl
(defun tokenize
  ((device (cons head tail))
    ...)
  ((device '())
    (case (get-characters-from-device device)
      ('eof
        '())
      ((tuple 'value chars)
        (tokenize device chars)))))
```

The use of ``get`` and ``put`` will cause a function to behave differently
when called with the same input at different occasions. This makes the code
hard to read since it is non-deterministic. Debugging will be more
complicated since a function using ``get`` and ``put`` is a function of not
only of its argument, but also of the process dictionary. Many of the run
time errors in LFE (for example ``bad_match``) include the arguments to a
function, but never the process dictionary.

### 6.6 Use import judiciously

We strongly urge you to be caseful about the use of ``(import ...)`` in
``(defmodule ...)``. Over-using can make code in the module harder to read,
since you cannot directly see in what module a function is defined.

Generally, explicit is better than implicit.

That being said, there are times when using ``import`` actually makes the
code *more* legible.

### 6.7 Exporting functions

Make a distinction of why a function is exported. A function can be exported
for the following reasons (for example):

* It is a user interface to the module.
* It is an interface function for other modules.
* It is called from ``apply``, ``spawn``, etc., but only from within its
  module.

Use different ``(export ...)`` groupings and comment them accordingly.

Example:

```cl
(defmodule my-mod
  ;; user interface
  (export
    (help 0)
    (start 0)
    (stop 0)
    (info 1))
  ;; inter-module exports
  (export
    (make-pid 1)
    (make-pid 2)
    (process-abbrevs 0)
    (print-info 5))
  ;; exports for use within module only
  (export
    (init 1)
    (info-log-impl 1)))
```
