---
layout: user-guide
guide: 2
total_guides: 4
---
# 4 Functions and Modules

## 4.2 LFE-Specific Functions and Macros

### 4.2.1 Core Forms

{% highlight cl %}
(quote e)
(cons head tail)
(car e)
(cdr e)
(list e ... )
(tuple e ... )
(binary seg ... )
(lambda (arg ...) ...)
(match-lambda
  ((arg ... ) {{(when e ...)}} ...)
  ... )
(let ((pat {{(when e ...)}} e)
      ...)
  ... )
(let-function ((name lambda|match-lambda)
               ... )
  ... )
(letrec-function ((name lambda|match-lambda)
                  ... )
  ... )
(let-macro ((name lambda-match-lambda)
            ...)
  ...)
(progn ... )
(if test true-expr {{false-expr}})
(case e
  (pat {{(when e ...)}} ...)
   ... ))
(receive
  (pat {{(when e ...)}} ... )
  ...
  (after timeout ... ))
(catch ... )
(try
  e
  {{(case ((pat {{(when e ...)}} ... )
          ... ))}}
  {{(catch
     (((tuple type value ignore) {{(when e ...)}}

      ... )
     ... )}}
  {{(after ... )}})
(funcall func arg ... )
(call mod func arg ... )

(define-function name lambda|match-lambda)
(define-macro name lambda|match-lambda)
{% endhighlight %}

### 4.2.2 Macro Forms

{% highlight cl %}
(: mod func arg ... ) =>
        (call 'mod 'func arg ... )
(? {{timeout {{default}} }})

(++ ... )
(list* ...)
(let* (...) ... )
(flet ((name (arg ...) ...)
       ...)
  ...)
(flet* (...) ... )
(fletrec ((name (arg ...) ...)
          ...)
  ...)

(cond ... )
(andalso ... )
(orelse ... )
(fun func arity)
(fun mod func arity)
(lc (qual ...) ...)
(bc (qual ...) ...)
(match-spec ...)
{% endhighlight %}

### 4.2.3 Common Lisp Inspired Macros

{% highlight cl %}
(defun name (arg ...) ...)
(defun name
  ((argpat ...) ...)
  ...)

(defmacro name (arg ...) ...)
(defmacro name arg ...)
(defmacro name
  ((argpat ...) ...)
  ...)

(defsyntax name
  (pat exp)
  ...)

(macrolet ((name (arg ...) ...)
           ...)
  ...)
(syntaxlet ((name (pat exp) ...)
            ...)
  ...)

(defmodule name ...)
(defrecord name ...)
{% endhighlight %}

### 4.2.4 Scheme Inspired Macros

{% highlight cl %}
(define (name arg ...) ...)
(define name lambda|match-lambda)
(define-syntax name
  (syntax-rules (pat exp) ...)|(macro (pat body) ...))
(let-syntax ((name ...)
             ...)
  ...)
(begin ...)
(define-module name ...)
(define-record name ...)
{% endhighlight %}

### 4.2.5 Additional Lisp Functions

{% highlight cl %}
(<arith_op> expr ...)
(<comp_op> expr ...)
        The standard arithmentic operators, + - * /, and comparison
        operators, > >= < =< == /= =:= =/= , can take multiple
        arguments the same as their standard lisp counterparts. This
        is still experimental and implemented using macros. They do,
        however, behave like normal functions and evaluate ALL their
        arguments before doing the arithmetic/comparisons operations.

(acons key value list)
(pairlis keys values {{list}})
(assoc key list)
(assoc-if test list)
(assoc-if-not test list)
(rassoc value list)
(rassoc-if test list)
(rassoc-if-not test list)
        The standard association list functions.

(subst new old tree)
(subst-if new test tree)
(subst-if-not new test tree)
(sublis alist tree)
        The standard substituition functions.

(macroexpand-1 expr {{environment}})
        If Expr is a macro call, does one round of expansion,
        otherwise returns Expr.

(macroexpand expr {{environment}})
        Returns the expansion returned by calling macroexpand-1
        repeatedly, starting with Expr, until the result is no longer
        a macro call.

(macroexpand-all expr {{environment}})
        Returns the expansion from the expression where all macro
        calls have been expanded with macroexpand.

        NOTE that when no explicit environment is given the
        macroexpand functions then only the default built-in macros
        will be expanded. Inside macros and in the shell the variable
        $ENV is bound to the current macro environment.

(eval expr {{environment}})
        Evaluate the expression expr. Note that only the pre-defined
        lisp functions, erlang BIFs and exported functions can be
        called. Also no local variables can be accessed. To access
        local variables the expr to be evaluated can be wrapped in a
        let defining these.

        For example if the data we wish to evaluate is in the variable
        expr and it assumes there is a local variable "foo" which it
        needs to access then we could evaluate it by calling:

        (eval `(let ((foo ,foo)) ,expr))
{% endhighlight %}
