---
layout: processes-tutorial
guide: 1
total_guides: 4
---
# Tutorial: Lightweight Processes

Due to its Erlang foundation, an LFE program is composed of anywhere from 1 to
hundreds of thousands of lightweight processes.  In fact, a
<a href="https://groups.google.com/forum/?fromgroups=#!topic/comp.lang.functional/5kldn1QJ73c">2005 message</a>
to
<a href="https://groups.google.com/forum/?fromgroups=#!forum/comp.lang.functional">comp.lang.functional</a>
reported spawning 20 million messages in a ring benchmark (on a 1.5 GHz SPARC
with 16 GB RAM).

This is possible in part because each process operates independently with its
own private memory, communicating via message passing, and the overhead for an
Erlang process is pretty low (~1.5k for 32-bit and ~2.7k for 64-bit; see the
Efficiency Guide's section on
<a href="http://www.erlang.org/doc/efficiency_guide/processes.html">processes</a>
for more info).

This tutorial aims to decrease the mystery around Erlang processes and how to
use them in LFE programs.

## 1 Interacting with Processes

### 1.1 Dump and ```flush```

Processes in LFE are built from functions. These running functions communicate
with other running functions via messages. When you start up the LFE REPL,
you're using an Erlang process, and you can communicate with it just like any
other process.

Let's get the REPL's process id and then send messages to the REPL using the
PID:

{% highlight cl %}
> (set pid (self))
<0.30.0>
> (! pid '"Testing: 1, 2, 3!")
"Testing: 1, 2, 3!"
> (! pid '"This is another test message...")
"This is another test message..."
> (! pid (list 1 2 3))
(1 2 3)
>
{% endhighlight %}

The messages are sitting in the inbox of the process they were sent to, the
REPL. If we flush the REPL's inbox, we can see them:

{% highlight cl %}
> (: c flush)
Shell got "Test1"
Shell got "Testing: 1, 2, 3!"
Shell got "This is another test message..."
Shell got [1,2,3]
ok
>
{% endhighlight %}

### 1.2 Getting Classy with ```receive```

As you might imagine, there's a better way to do this. Let's send another
message to the REPL's message queue (inbox):

{% highlight cl %}
> (! pid (list 1 2 3))
(1 2 3)
>
{% endhighlight %}

Now let's take a look at that message without flushing the queue:

{% highlight cl %}
> (receive
    ((list a b c)
     (: io format '"results: ~p ~p ~p~n" (list a b c))))
results: 1 2 3
ok
>
{% endhighlight %}

If there is a message in the inbox matching the pattern we have defined (in
this case, a list of length 3), then we will have access to the data that is matched and
bound to the variables. For more information on pattern matching, see
<a href="/tutorials/patterns/1.html">the tutorial</a>.

If there are a bunch of messages in the inbox, they will all be iterated over until
a match is found:

{% highlight cl %}
> (set pid (self))
<0.30.0>
> (! pid (tuple 1 2 3))
#(1 2 3)
> (! pid (tuple 2 3))
#(2 3)
> (! pid (tuple 3))
#(3)
> (receive
    ((tuple a)
     (: io format '"results: ~p ~n" (list a))))
results: 3
ok
{% endhighlight %}

Let's confirm that only the last message we entered was matched:

{% highlight cl %}
> (: c flush)
Shell got {1,2,3}
Shell got {2,3}
ok
>
{% endhighlight %}

### 1.3 Shell ```spawn```

So far, we've only look at the process for the REPL itself. We'd like to expand
our horizons and look at creating a process in the REPL, writing to it
instead of our shell.

However, we are faced with a difficulty: Erlang's ```spawn``` function
takes a module and function as a parameter.

Here is a simple function called `print-result` that responds to
messages when it's running as an Erlang process using a call to
```receive```:

{% highlight cl %}
> (defun print-result ()
      (receive
        (msg
          (: io format '"Received message: '~s'~n" (list msg))))))
#Fun<lfe_eval.21.53503600>
>
{% endhighlight %}

Now that we've got our message-capable function, let's ```spawn``` it and
capture the process id so that we can write to it:

{% highlight cl %}
> (set pid (spawn (lambda () (print-result))))
<0.66.0>
> (! pid '"Time is an illusion. Lunchtime doubly so.")
"Time is an illusion. Lunchtime doubly so."
Received message: 'Time is an illusion. Lunchtime doubly so.'
>
{% endhighlight %}

As you can see, when we send our message to the process we started with
```spawn```, the process' function prints out the message that it received from
us.

Up next: we'll do the same thing from a module. Crazy times we live
in, aren't they?
