---
layout: user-guide
guide: 2
total_guides: 7
---
# 5 Recursion

## 5.4 The Dedekind-Peano Axioms

For those that are math-averse, don't let this frighten you -- this will be a
peaceful journey that should not leave you bewildered. Rather, it
will provide some nice background for how recursion came to be used. With the
history reviewed, we'll make our way into practical implementations.


### 5.4.1 Foundations

Despite the fluorescence of maths in the 17th and 18th centuries and the
growing impact of number theory, the ground upon which mathematics were built
was shaky at best. Indeed, what we now consider to be the foundations of
mathematics had not even been agreed upon (and this didn't happen until the
first half of the 20th century with the maturation of logic and rise of
axiomatic set theory).

One of the big problems facing mathematicians and one that also prevented the
clarification of the foundations, was this: a thorough, precise, and consistent
definition of the natural numbers as well as operations that could be performed
on them (e.g., addition, multiplication, etc.). There was a long-accepted
intuitive understanding, however, this was insufficient for complete
mathematical rigor.

Richard Dedekind addressed this with his method of cuts, but it was Giuseppe
Peano that supplied us with the clearest, most easily described axioms defining
the natural numbers and arithmetic, wherein he made effective use of
recursion. His definitions can be easily found in text books and on the
Internet; we will take a slightly unique approach, however, and cast them in
terms of LFE.


### 5.4.2 A Constant and Equality

The first five Peano axioms deal with the constant (often written as "0") and
the reflexive, symmetric, transitive and closed equality relations. These don't
relate recursion directly, so we're going to skip them ;-)

### 5.4.3 Successor Function

The concept of the "successor" in the Peano axioms is a primitive; it is taken
as being true without having been proved. It is informally defined as being the
next number following a given number "n".

In LFE:
{% highlight cl %}
(defun successor (n)
  (+ n 1))
{% endhighlight %}

The things to keep in mind here are that 1) we haven't defined addition yet,
and 2) you must not interpret "+" as addition in this context, rather as the
operator that allows for succession to occur. In the world of the Peano axioms,
"+" is only validly used with "n" and "1".

This function is defined as being "basic primitive recursive". The basic
primitive recursives are defined by axioms; the term was coined by Rózsa
Péter.

### 5.4.4 The Remaining Axioms

The remaining three Peano axioms do not touch upon recursion directly, so we
leave them to your own research and reading pleasure.
