---
layout: user-guide
guide: 3
total_guides: 7
---
# 5 Recursion

## 5.5 Primitive Recursive Functions

In the previous section, we leaned about the primitive recursive function called
the "successor", one that was used by Peano in his axioms. There are other
primitive recursive functions as well, and these are usually given as axioms
(i.e., without proof):

* the "zero function"
* the "projection function"
* "identity function"

These combined with the Peano axioms allow us to define other primitive
recursive functions.

### 5.5.1 Addition

In the literature, the definition for Peano addition is done in the following
manner:

    a + 0 = a,
    a + S(b) = S(a + b)

where ```S``` is the successor function defined in the previous section.

So here we have an identity function: any number that has zero added to it has
the result of the number itself.

Secondly, a number, when added with the successor of another number is equal to
the successor of the two numbers combined. Let's take a look at an example:

* The number 0, when applied to the successor function yields 1 (```S(0) = 1```)
* Therefore, ```a + S(0) = a + 1```
* By Peano's definition of addition then, we have ```a + 1 = S(a + 0)```
* Which then gives ```a + 1 = S(a)```

In other words, the successor of ```a``` is ```a + 1```.

These rules for addition are sometimes given in the following pseudo code:

    add(0, x) = x
    add(succ(n), x) = succ(add(n, x))

In LFE, we'd like to maintain symmetry with this. We could try to construct a
function that had both definitions as pattern arguments, thus alleviating the
need for two function definitions. However, to perfectly map the pseudo code
to LFE, we'd have to put a function call in our pattern... and that's not
possible. If, though, we do a little algebraic juggling, we can work around
this. In our pseudo code we have two parameters: ```succ(n)``` and ```x```. If
apply a predecessor function to ```succ(n)```, we'll just have ```n``` -- which
would do nicely for a matched function argument in LFE. But we'll also need to
apply this predecessor function to the ```n``` on the other side of the
equation.

Let's create such a "predecessor" function:
{% highlight cl %}
(defun predecessor
  ((0) 0)
  ((n) (- n 1)))
{% endhighlight %}

Now, we can recast the canonical form above using the workaround of the
```predecessor``` primitive recursive function, allowing us to use one function
to define Peano's addition axiom:
{% highlight cl %}
(defun add
  ((0 x) x)
  ((n x) (successor (add (predecessor n) x))))
{% endhighlight %}

All of this may seem rather absurd, given what we do in every-day programming.
Remember, though: the verbosity of these axioms and their derived definitions
serves to explicitly show that no assumptions are being made and that all these
operations can indeed be built upon basic principles.

### 5.5.2 Subtraction

Next up, let's take a look at subtraction:

    sub(0, x) = x
    sub(pred(n), x) = pred(sub(n, x))

Similar to addition above, we make some adjustments for the convenience of
pattern matching:
{% highlight cl %}
(defun subtract
  ((0 x) x)
  ((n x) (predecessor (subtract (predecessor n) x))))
{% endhighlight %}

Due to the manner in which we have defined our functions, the usual usage is
reversed for our ```subtract``` function. The first operand is not the number
that is being subtracted from, but rather the number that is being *subtracted*.
We can see this in action if we put our definitions in a file called
```prf.lfe``` (named for "primitive recursive functions") and ```slurp``` it in
the LFE REPL:
{% highlight cl %}
> (slurp '"prf.lfe")
#(ok prf)
> (subtract 1 100)
99
>
{% endhighlight %}

### 5.5.3 Multiplication

The last one of these that we will look at is multiplication, and then we'll
move on to something a little more complicated :-)

    mult(0, x) = 0
    mult(succ(n), x) = x + (x * n)

Again, using our pattern workaround:
{% highlight cl %}
(defun multiply
  ((0 x) 0)
  ((n x) (add x (multiply x (predecessor n)))))
{% endhighlight %}
