---
layout: user-guide
guide: 4
total_guides: 7
---
# 5 Recursion


## 5.6 Partial Recursive Functions

We've covered primitive recursive functions in the previous section; now we'll
take a brief look at what are called "partial recursive functions". These are
functions that provide an output for given input but which may not be defined
for *every* possible input.

Partial recursive functions are also referred to as "computable functions" and
can be defined using Turing machines or the λ-calculus (among others). In fact,
an equivalent definition of partial recursive function is actually a function
that can be computed by a Turing machine.


## 5.7 Total Recursive Functions

As opposed to a partial recursive function, a *total* recursive function is one
that is defined for all possible function inputs. Every primitive recursive
function is total recursive. There are, however, total recursive functions that
are *not* primitive recursive. The Ackermann function is one such.


### 5.7.1 The Ackermann Function

The Ackermann function is one of the simplest and earliest-discovered examples
of a total recursive function that is not primitive recursive. The variant
of the function that we present below is the two-variable version developed by
Rózsa Péter and Raphael Robinson (the original was more verbose and with three
variables).

Here is the function in LFE
{% highlight cl %}
(defun ackermann
  ((0 n) (+ n 1))
  ((m 0) (ackermann (- m 1) 1))
  ((m n) (ackermann (- m 1) (ackermann m (- n 1)))))
{% endhighlight %}

As we can see, this function quite clearly calls itself ;-)

Here's some example usage:
{% highlight cl %}
> (c '"prf")
#(module prf)
> (: prf ackermann 0 0)
1
> (: prf ackermann 0 1)
2
> (: prf ackermann 1 0)
2
> (: prf ackermann 1 1)
3
> (: prf ackermann 1 2)
4
> (: prf ackermann 2 2)
7
> (: prf ackermann 2 4)
11
> (: prf ackermann 4 1)
65533
>
{% endhighlight %}
