---
layout: user-guide
guide: 1
total_guides: 6
---
# 9 Development & Deployment

## 9.1 Creating Projects with Rebar

In this section we'll be exploring how rebar can be used to manage LFE projects.

### 9.1.1 Dependencies

You're going to need to have an Erlang. We recommend using kerl, as deponstrated
in the <a href="/user-guide/devops/2.html">next section</a>.
However, you may already have one set up, in which case you're good for the next
step.

### 9.1.2 Installation

```bash
$ curl -L -O https://raw.github.com/wiki/rebar/rebar/rebar
$ mv rebar /usr/local/bin/
$ chmod a+x /usr/local/bin/rebar
```

Make sure everything's working as expected:

```bash
$ rebar h
```

This will give you output like the following:

```text
Usage: rebar [-h] [-c] [-v <verbose>] [-V] [-f] [-D <defines>] [-j <jobs>]
             [-C <config>] [-p] [var=value,...] <command,...>

  -h, --help        Show the program options
  -c, --commands    Show available commands
  -v, --verbose     Verbosity level (-v, -vv, -vvv, --verbose 3). Default: 0
  -V, --version     Show version information
  -f, --force       Force
  -D                Define compiler macro
  -j, --jobs        Num concurrent workers a command may use. Default: 3
  -C, --config      Rebar config file to use
  -p, --profile     Profile this run of rebar
  var=value     rebar global variables (e.g. force=1)
  command       Command to run (e.g. compile)
```

### 9.1.2 What is a Project?

The first question we should probably address is this: How are we defining a
project?

An LFE project is a set of modules developed and distributed to accomplish a
particular goal. The project should have a rebar configuration file, a source
directory with `.lfe` files in it, possibly an include directory, and (ideally)
unit tests in a `test` directory.

### 9.1.2 Project Structure

Let's expand upon the project definition given above, focusing on the directory
structure of a prototypical project and some of the files one might find in an
LFE project.

```
├── ebin
│   └── libexample.app
├── src
│   └── libexample.lfe
├── Makefile
├── README.md
└── rebar.config
```

This is from a sample project whose purpose is to provide a library for use by
other LFE (or Erlang!) projects. More on that below.

Rebar supports LFE files. All that it needs is the standard `rebar.config` and
an `.app` file in the `ebin` directory. With these, Rebar will be able to
download the project dependencies and compile the `*.lfe` files in `src` to the
`ebin` directory as `*.beam` files.

### 9.1.3 Project Dependencies

Dependencies are handled very nicely with Rebar: just add a git repo in your
`rebar.config` file like so:

```erlang
{deps, [
    {lfe, ".*", {git, "git://github.com/rvirding/lfe.git", "develop"}}
  ]}.
```

Any dependencies listed here will be downloaded with the `rebar get-deps`
command. Once downloaded, issuing the `rebar compile` command will not only
compile your project's `src/*` files into its `ebin` directory, but will compile
all dependency project source code as well.
