---
layout: user-guide
guide: 2
total_guides: 4
---
# 2 Diving In

## 2.2 Atoms and Strings

### 2.2.1 Atoms

Atoms are a data type in Erlang that is used to represent non-numerical
constants. In LFE, the typographical limitations of Erlang don't apply, since
they're always quoted in LFE ;-)

Atoms have a value: the same as their text:
{% highlight cl %}
> 'monday
monday
>
{% endhighlight %}
We saw this in the section on Boolean operators with the atoms of ```true```
and ```false```. Since there are no Boolean types in Erlang or LFE, the atoms
```true``` and ```false``` are used instead.

Here are some more examples of atoms:
{% highlight cl %}
> 'Tuesday
Tuesday
> '_Weds
_Weds
> '+
+
> '*
*
> '|and now with spaces|
|and now with spaces|
>
{% endhighlight %}

Though very simple, atoms have a huge impact on our everyday use of Erlang and
LFE, primarily in the area of pattern matching. Hold that thought, though;
we're not quite ready for it yet!

Furthermore, atoms are stored differently in Erlang than strings. They take up
less space and are more efficient to compare than strings.

### 2.2.2 Strings

Now we come to the oddball of Erlang: the string. In truth, there is no such
thing. Strings in Erlang are just lists of integers:
{% highlight cl %}
> '"hello"
"hello"
> (list 104 101 108 108 111)
"hello"
>
{% endhighlight %}

Because Erlang (and thus LFE) strings consume 8 bytes per character on 32-bit
systems and 16 bytes on 64-bit systems, they are not very efficient. As such,
if you need to work with long strings in LFE, you probably want to use
```(binary ...)```, but that's in the next section :-)
