---
layout: style-guide
guide: 3
total_guides: 12
---
# LFE Style Guide

## 4 Documentation

### 4.1 Document everything

You should use document strings on all visible functions to explain how to
use your code.

Unless some bit of code is painfully self-explanatory, document it with a
documentation string (also known as docstring).

Documentation strings are destined to be read by the programmers who use
your code. Documentation strings are where you should document your API.
They should describe how to use the code (including what pitfalls to avoid),
as opposed to how the code works (and where more work is needed), which is
what you'll put in comments.

Supply a documentation string when defining top-level functions, types,
classes, variables and macros. Generally, add a documentation string
wherever the language allows.

For functions, the docstring should describe the function's contract: what
the function does, what the arguments mean, what values are returned, what
conditions the function can signal. It should be expressed at the
appropriate level of abstraction, explaining the intended meaning rather
than, say, just the syntax. In documentation strings, capitalize the names
of Lisp symbols, such as function arguments. For example:

```cl
(defun get-area (length width)
  "This function calculates the area of a rectangle.

  The value of LENGTH should be an integer. The value of WIDTH should be an
  integer."
  ...)
```

A long docstring may usefully begin with a short, single-sentence summary,
followed by the larger body of the docstring.

When you fix a bug, consider whether what the fixed code does is obviously
correct or not; if not, you must add a comment explaining the reason for the
code in terms of fixing the bug. Adding the bug number, if any, is also
recommended.


### 4.2 Comment Semicolons

Comments are explanations to the future maintainers of the code. Even if
you're the only person who will ever see and touch the code, even if you're
either immortal and never going to quit, or unconcerned with what happens
after you leave (and have your code self-destruct in such an eventuality),
you may find it useful to comment your code. Indeed, by the time you revisit
your code, weeks, months or years later, you will find yourself a different
person from the one who wrote it, and you will be grateful to that previous
self for making the code readable.

You must comment anything complicated so that the next developer can
understand what's going on. (Again, the "hit by a bus" principle.)

Also use comments as a way to guide those who read the code, so they know
what to find where.

* File headers and important comments that apply to large sections of code in
  a source file should begin with four semicolons ``;;;;``.
* You should use three semicolons ``;;;`` to begin comments that apply to
  just one top-level form or small group of top-level forms.
* Inside a top-level form, you should use two semicolons to begin a comment
  if it appears between lines.
* You should use one semicolon if it is a parenthetical remark and occurs at
  the end of a line. You should use spaces to separate the comment from the
  code it refers to so the comment stands out. You should try to vertically
  align consecutive related end-of-line comments.

Example:

```cl
;;;; Great module description
;;;; ...
(defmodule great-module
  (export
    (some-useful-function 1)))

...

;;; Comment about function
(defun some-useful-function (useful-argument)
  (another-function useful-argument)           ; Comment at end of line
  (yet-another-fucntion)                       ; Another one for this line
  ;; Comment about the next chunk of code at the same level of indentation
  ...)

...

For all semicolon comments, you should include a space between the semicolon
and the text of the comment.

### 4.3 Grammar and Punctuation

When a comment is a full sentence, you should capitalize the initial letter
of the first word and end the comment with a period. In general, you should
use correct punctuation.

### 4.4 Attention Required

You should follow the convention of using ``TODO`` OR ``XXX`` comments for
code requiring special attention. For code using unobvious forms, you must
include a comment.

For comments requiring special attention, such as incomplete code, todo
items, questions, breakage, and danger, include a ``TODO`` OR ``XXX``
comment indicating the type of problem, its nature, and any notes on how it
may be addressed.

The comments begin with ``TODO`` OR ``XXX`` in all capital letters, followed
by the name, e-mail address, or other identifier of the person with the best
context about the problem referenced by the ``TODO``. The main purpose is to
have a consistent ``TODO`` that can be searched to find out how to get more
details upon request. A ``TODO`` is not a commitment that the person
referenced will fix the problem. Thus when you create a ``TODO``, it is
almost always your name that is given.

When signing comments, you should use your username or full email address,
which ever most readily identifies you. If using github, you can use your
github username preceded by the "@" sign. Do not just initials of your name.

Examples:

```cl
;; TODO (george@gmail.com): Refactor to provide a better API.
```

Be specific when indicating times or software releases in a ``TODO`` comment
and use YYYY-MM-DD format for dates to make automated processing of such
dates easier, e.g., 2038-01-20 for the end of the 32-bit signed ``time_t``.


```cl
;; XXX (@rvirding): Remove this code after release 1.7 or before
;; 2012-11-30.
```

For code that uses unobvious forms to accomplish a task, you should include a
comment stating the purpose of the form and the task it accomplishes.

### 4.5 Domain-Specific Languages

You should design your Domain Specific Language to be easy to read and
understand by people familiar with the domain.

You must properly document all your Domain Specific Language.

Sometimes, your DSL is designed for terseness. In that case, it is important
to document what each program does, if it's not painfully obvious from the
context.

Notably, when you use regular expressions (e.g. with the ``re`` module), you
should always put in a comment (usually a two-semicolon comment on the
previous line) explaining, at least basically, what the regular expression
does, or what the purpose of using it is. The comment need not spell out
every bit of the syntax, but it should be possible for someone to follow the
logic of the code without actually parsing the regular expression.
