---
layout: style-guide
guide: 9
total_guides: 12
---
# LFE Style Guide

## 9 Data Representation

### 9.1 Empty Lists

Thanks to Erlang, LFE doesn't have any of the problems of ambiguity around
``NIL``, empty lists, and ``'false``:

* There is no ``NIL`` in LFE. If you want to indicate that something has no
  value, use the Erlang convention: return the ``'undefined`` atom.
* The empty ``'()`` list in LFE is just that: an empty list. It cannot be
  compared meaningfully to an undefined value or a boolean.
* The boolean value for "False" in LFE is the atom ``'false``. It cannot be
  meaningfully compared to an emoty list or an undefined value.

### 9.2 Do Not Abuse Lists

Even though back in 1958, LISP was short for "LISt Processing", its
successors such as Common Lisp, Clojure, and LFE, have been modern
programming languages with modern data structures since the 1980s and
mid-2000s, respectively. You should use the appropriate data structures in
your programs.

You should not abuse the builtin (single-linked) LIST data structure where
it is not appropriate, even though LFE may make that easy to do.

You should only use lists when their performance characteristics is
appropriate for the algorithm at hand: sequential iteration over the entire
contents of the list.

An exception where it is appropriate to use lists is when it is known in
advance that the size of the list will remain very short (say, less than 16
elements).

List data structures are often (but not always) appropriate for macros and
functions used by macros at compile-time: indeed, not only is source code
passed as lists in LFE, but the macro-expansion and compilation processes
will typically walk over the entire source code sequentially.

Another exception where it is appropriate to use lists is for introducing
literal constants that will be transformed into more appropriate data
structures at compile-time or load-time. It is a good to have a function
with a relatively short name to build your program's data structures from
such literals.

In the many cases when lists are not the appropriate data structure,
different data types and various libraries provide plenty of alternatives
that should fulfill all the basic needs of your programs.

### 9.3 Lists vs. Tuples

For very simple tasks that require a little more structure than what lists
provide, you should use ``tuple``s.

If other parts of your application need to work with this data, if you need
to be able to pass data around to functions, it's probably a good time to
switch to using records.

### 9.4 Lists vs. Records

You should avoid using a list as anything besides a container of elements of
like type. You should not use a list as method of passing multiple separate
values of different types in and out of function calls. Sometimes it is
convenient to use a list as a little ad hoc structure, i.e. "the first
element of the list is a FOO, and the second is a BAR", but this should be
used minimally since it gets harder to remember the little convention. You
should only use a list that way when destructuring the list of arguments from
a function, or creating a list of arguments to which to APPLY a function.

The proper way to pass around an object comprising several values of
heterogeneous types is to use a record as defined by ``(defrecord ...)``.

You should use multiple values only when a function returns a small number
of values that are meant to be destructured immediately by the caller,
rather than passed together as arguments to further functions.

### 9.5 Lists vs. Arrays

If you have code that requires data structures with nothing but numeric
keys, arrays may be a good fit. Arrays provide access to elements with
numerical indices. You can also fold over arrays while ignoring undefined
slots.

Note that, unlike most other data structures you will find in LFE/Erlang
which are 1-indexed, arrays are 0-indexed.

<a href="http://learnyousomeerlang.com/a-short-visit-to-common-data-structures#arrays">More information</a>.

### 9.5 Lists vs. Sets

If you have data stored in lists and want to start doing union or
intersection operations, it's time to switch to a set data type. Don't even
think about writing macros for your lists. That'd just be silly.

LFE/Erlang has several to choose from:

* ordsets
* sets
* gb_sets
* sofs

<a href="http://learnyousomeerlang.com/a-short-visit-to-common-data-structures#set-of-sets">More information</a>.

### 9.6 Lists vs. Erlang Term Storage vs. Mnesia

If your data structures stored in lists need to be fast, support destructive
updates, don't need garbage collection, and allow for other processes to
access them, ETS tables might be just your thing.

<a href="http://learnyousomeerlang.com/ets">More information</a>.

If you need better concurrency than ETS provides, want transactions, or want
to store your data in either memory or on disk, you might want to move your
data into Mnesia.

<a href="http://learnyousomeerlang.com/mnesia">More information</a>.
